Welcome everybody.
Wonderful to have you all here. Thank you for joining us.
We've got you here for half an hour.
Sam Upend, our chair of the health committee,
having a number of you have already been in here
and spoken to us, so we appreciate you all coming
back, coming back together.
'cause coming together is what we need to do
to deliver for New Zealanders.
Um, I'll let you introduce yourself
and make a few, um, brief remarks.
And then I know members
around the table we'll have questions.
And I think the purpose of this is to, look,
we had a strategy back in 2017.
Um, we haven't seen it implemented.
We want to make sure that the reasons it wasn't implemented,
uh, sort of addressed so it doesn't happen again.
And then to move forward, right?
'cause we need to deliver better outcomes
for Kiwis in the space. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks.
Um, Koto, I'm Alison Bennett, uh, G
of Health Systems Strategy at Man Water.
Uh, thank you. I'm joined here with my colleagues, um,
Don Helen Stokes Land from House New Zealand, and Dr.
Sarah Molly from NZ Boston.
We've got some other, um,
Rachel Haggerty here also from Health
New Zealand to help us today.
Um, I'd like to acknowledge that whilst we have a strong,
clear strategy, we haven't delivered as intended
and still have one
of the lowest donation rates internationally.
I think we have done a lot of work around a number
of the strategic priorities.
However, there are two remaining priorities
where we could do a lot more.
Um, we're really heartened around the work
that NZ Boss has done
and the work that HZ has been doing in terms
of improving capacity in the system, uh,
and also the work that's going on around the development
of the plan to deliver the strategic content.
So
Thank you. Um,
so, um, first of all, I'd like to thank Michael Papes
for raising this issue is a critical one for us,
and I think it's becoming more critical.
So I'll just capture that for the committee by saying that
both referral rates from hospital ICUs
for potential organ donors are declining quite
rapidly in the last two years.
Um, we sit at around 30%
or 30 to 40% here as compared to, um,
90% in Australia and the uk.
So in terms of donors that we are, potential donors
that we are notified about
and can have conversations with health about.
A similar issue is happening
with consent rates in New Zealand.
So when whanau are
formally approached about organ donation within our system,
between 30 and 40% say yes,
and that has decreased from 40 to 50% in more recent in,
in the relatively recent past.
Um, if you look at somewhere like Australia or the UK
or we're talking usually about 50
to 60% consent in that setting.
And that reflects really our ability to deliver.
Um, and it is based on really specific funding.
Our ability to deliver at the patient bedside
daily support from someone who understands
organ donation, can work with teams
to help them make those numbers better.
And also can support clinicians who are currently
really having, uh, challenges delivering
what are really difficult processes moving
through the organ donation, uh, identification
and consent process.
It's not an easy process.
Both myself
and my colleague Joe, who's here with me, our intensivist
of 20 years standing each,
we know the processes, we know the issues.
So we know that that is what needs to be provided
and the funding has not been there to enable us to do that.
Um, and that is the piece that we're going to work on
and work forward, um,
and do some formal costing, some formal collaboration
with the Ministry and Health New Zealand to try
and make sure we understand exactly
what is required to deliver that.
Thank you. And very briefly, KO Helen sts.
So I'm the National Chief Medical Officer
for Health New Zealand, and my colleague branch of here
with me, who is very much on the operational side
of Health New Zealand, because as you know,
it's a large organization.
Um, and I wanted to thank you for the opportunity
to come back collectively as a group
to discuss this issue together
because there's no doubt that the solutions are going
to be, are collaborative.
Um, they always were collaborative, but this,
but I think this, uh, raising this issue in this way,
and my thanks also to Michael, um, is that it has, uh,
a strong spotlight on something.
Uh, we all agree we want to do better in terms of the rates
of people who whose families far out choose
to progress with donation.
Um, and there is a huge, there is, it is no,
it's nobody disagrees.
We're all absolutely united in that it's good for patients
for their far out and for the entire health system
to increase rates of organ donation.
It is sustainable. It is, uh, very cost effective.
And of course it's utterly transformative. So thank you.
And we're here to collaborate and help in any way we can.
Thank you. Thank you very much
For those remarks. I'll
open it up to members
for questions. Dr. Chong,
Obviously, just now you mentioned the donation rates are
dropped because we got a lower rate of, uh, family consent.
Correct. So, but I look at your strategies in 2017.
I think one of the things to improve how people registered
and share their donation intention with families
and clinician, what approach actually done in the last,
you know, eight years to improve the system?
Um, I can take that one.
So again, um, the,
we certainly agree that we would like to do more work
in, um, registration of intent in New Zealand.
Um, the driver's license process works
reasonably well,
but we know that there are concerns around how
that consent is informed
and also how we're able to access that at the time we need
to, to understand what that, um, person's intentions were.
We have done some work around that in terms of
providing additional information, leaflets
and support for people at the
registrar point of registration.
What we would say though is that we would like
to move forward with a better registration system,
a registry here and opt out reg, um, opt-in registry,
but we do not have funding at the moment to deliver that.
Um, if we were to fund that,
it would take away from the active clinical delivery of
coordination and,
and, um, management
of organ donation from our clinical team's focus, which is
what we do have funding for.
Yes, but you didn't actually answer my questions.
You, you've been keep saying that you did a lot of work,
but what work you actually do?
You keep saying that you, uh, we do a lot of work for, for
to improve that, but you,
you can't even mention anything. So
The only Is there any specific, uh, example, so
The only work we've been able to do is work
with the driver's license system
and the Ministry of Transport to, um,
improve our access to that information
and also to work with them
to improve information at the patient.
Um, at the registration point, we do not have funding
to support more work to develop a registry.
We have a plan and that's part of our strategy,
but we also know that registration is likely
to have a much lower impact on rates of donation
and actual rates of donation than the work in directly
with whanau and the work directly with intensive care units.
And so our priority would be to see that funded first if
as we work in a constrained system. Go
Back to your answer just now.
The first time you answer my question, you said you, you,
you did a lot of work and then your second time you answer
me, the only work you can do is on the driving
license and registration.
Do you think you contradictory to each other?
Like, I usually try to buffer up, say, oh, you know,
we did a lot of work, but when we ask for more detail,
the only work you do is on the driving license, but not on,
but just now you said the main problem is the final
is the family consent.
That doesn't look like you do anything on that aspect.
We don't. We, we work with teams
to deliver the stra the areas of the strategy
that we can work on with the limitations
of the funding that we have.
Um, as I say, we have a strategy that we'll work through
with the ministry that includes a formal approach
and a costed approach
to establishing registration in New Zealand.
We have worked with overseas providers
to understand the benefits and down and risks of registries.
And so we have a clearer picture now of
what we believe is the right approach.
Mm-hmm. Um, we do not have the funds to deliver that.
Okay. Alright. Can I ask one more question? Sorry.
Sorry, she, you can.
So just now you said now you've got a
better idea, better pictures.
So what is the timeline to implement the changes?
Uh, with appropriate funding?
We, uh, I would expect it would probably take about a year
or so to establish a registry,
but as I say, we don't have the funding. Okay.
Thank you for raising that.
So you're saying it's about funding,
but, um, there was funds that were put aside to,
um, but it appears that the funds, uh, to,
that were appropriated for new services,
were not spent on new services.
They were spent on, uh, existing logistics
and coordination services.
And, but this isn't a witch hunt,
but what we want to make sure is
that when there is appropriation of new funding that is
actually spent on what that appropriation was intended for,
how was it that that didn't occur
Previously? So
at the time of transfer of organ donation into,
um, NZ boss, they came
with no new funding actually.
And the funding that was transferred from health did not
even meet the costs of
the day-to-day expenditure of the team.
In addition, we were in a position where,
which we considered to be unacceptable, where there was
a significant risk
and continuing risk of being unable even to manage the
donors that were referred to us.
Okay. And so we have had to
Got it. I,
Yeah. Um, the
money to support the new money came in, um,
two years after they arrived with us.
And during that time we've had, uh, a decline in,
uh, referrals
and a decline in the ability to deliver because of COVID.
But also essentially
what we have done is deliver on the four priorities
that we have outlined to the committee
based on working more with health increasing education.
That's all right. Working with transplantation
to improve utilization.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
I would like to understand this issue
of budget 21 funding being appropriated
and it not being used for the purposes
for which it was appropriated.
Um, can you please explain the decision process
that led to that outcome?
Um, I don't think we consider that it is true
that it was used for processes
that it was not appropriated for.
What we had to determine was how we
managed the clinical service.
Me, here's what the appropriation
and the budget document says, funding existing link roles
who are staffed to support deceased organ donation
and intensive care units.
If I understand correctly, that was the type
of role you discussed, discussed in your comments
that you don't currently have, creating a plan
to raise public awareness
and understanding still a, a, a gap, uh,
improving registration, which you've also indicated is work
yet to be done, improving training of staff
and designing a framework to measure progress.
Uh, has any of that work been done?
Yes. So the only two areas
that we've not made any progress in is the registry
and also the funding of staff into intensive care units.
And they essentially, that's
because the, we estimate that the cost of delivering
that in a, in a practical
and constructive way across New Zealand would be
of the order of, uh, an additional $10 million
or so a year. So
Let's go back to the point about the plan
to raise public awareness.
Yes. Tell me the extent to which that has been delivered.
So we have, um, we have had, uh, the ability to appoint
specific communication staff to, uh, increase the amount
of public work we are doing, both with earned media
and, um, through, uh, social media activity
and other, um, platforms.
We consider actually that that area
of work would be significantly improved by the ability
to have a registry and registration,
because that's a then a specific ask
and a specific focus for publicity.
But we certainly intend to keep growing, um,
as we have done the work that we do
around awareness in the public space.
Is it the case that all
of the 11 million over the four year period was used
for the purposes it was intended.
Uh, some of the work has had to go to supporting the
clinical delivery because of the underfunding
that the team came with.
It's not a lot of money. No.
It's, um, at maximum
or current in the current financial year is 3.7 million.
It's scaled up to that how much of
that money is being spent on the purpose for which was
intended as opposed to running intensive care.
We estimate that the cost
of running the service is probably of the order
of three to 4 million.
Um, and that's the basic service that's working
with transplant teams on developments to improve outcomes.
That's working on training
and teaching in hospitals, training
and teaching our intensive care trainees, um,
and also on the delivery of the practical service
to support organ donation,
which becomes more complex every year.
Um, the additional money at the moment we're working on a
number of programs
and projects in all of the areas of, um, the work
that we, that we have.
Um, and we have worked on
a strategy which we will be presenting in, uh, to, uh,
health New Zealand and the ministry. Now,
Mr. Chair, with your
forbearance, I'm still confused.
So do you mind if I continue to,
you may continue pursue this because it is important
and the committee's support
For Further funding
for this important initiative does depend on our ability to,
um, uh, have confidence that it'll be spent on the purpose
for which it was in, uh, which it was intended.
So it appears that, um, activity has taken place
under many of the areas that the new funding was, um,
was intended for, but also you've
Said That it was needed for existing service provision.
Yes. Can you please give a final view
on how much of the money was spent on
the initiatives listed in the budget document? I think
It, I think that that would be difficult
because, for instance, all of our education is delivered
by the teams that also deliver the clinical service.
All of the work on publicity is developed
and delivered by the teams
that deliver the clinical service.
So as I say, I estimate that of what would be around, um,
$5 million of appropriation a year.
At least three
and a half million would be being spent on delivery
of those, um, initiatives through the team
that also deliver clinical care.
Well, we'll just have to, uh,
and then just going back
to your original comment about when the transfer occurred,
which I assume is the health restructuring, um, uh,
there not being any money coming over
with the blood and organ service.
Can you please, um, explain what
that means in the context of your argument that most
of the money appropriated has been spent on the, um,
initiatives for the transplant? So
At the time of transfer, the money
that was being appropriated from Ministry
for organ donation was
around 1.9 million per year.
We are aware that
because the team had been being supported within a hospital
environment, the actual costs
of managing the team were higher than 1.9 million.
What we can't tell you is how much higher that was
because we did not receive all of the information.
What I would say from our experience
and from the challenges that we had with staffing of
that team when they arrived, that I would estimate
that the underfunding was of the order
of a million dollars a year.
If we, your submission to the committee includes,
uh, $542 million of intensive care
capacity uplift that occurred, um,
following the pandemic. Is that correct?
Um, ours, that's not our area of work that,
that belongs with Health New Zealand.
Can you explain the relevance of, of that to this, uh,
to this conversation please?
Thank you. I'll, I'll I'll start, Rachel, bring it in.
So, following Health New Zealand's appearance
of the Select committee a couple of months ago,
there were two outstanding questions, uh,
that were raised at the time.
And one was asking for specificity around the, uh, numbers
of increased beds in critical care.
'cause one of the original suggestions was
that there was a lack of capacity in ICU beds throughout
New Zealand that was contributing to some of this problem.
And actually Health New Zealand said, well, no,
we've evolved our bed base quite a lot, we've increased it
by over 32%, and that's where that, uh,
500 million figure has come from.
That's the spend since the pandemic,
the additional spend from baseline pandemic into
it bed capacity.
Um, so there was a surge cost and then on,
but that's now been absorbed into baseline
is now business as usual.
And the ICU bed base increased by, uh, 32.5% from,
uh, I see my figures 262 to 338
ICU beds throughout the country.
So that was the relevance to
that was a Health New Zealand investment and ongoing spend
and absorption into business as usual,
which meant we were fairly confident in our statement that,
uh, availability of ICU beds is not now,
certainly not nowadays, uh, a limiting factor on the ability
to harvest organs where there is the,
the potential on the consent to do so.
It may have been in the past, if we run outta bed capacity,
what happens is we defer planned surgery.
So somebody's due to have complex surgery may get
that deferred so
that the transplantation process can be completed.
That's the way we deal
with any modest capacity issues we now may have.
So that's the relevance of that topologies for confusion.
To Conclude, is it fair to say that it, that the,
um, budget 21 money was spent appropriately,
uh, albeit I'm hearing an inability to
account sent by, sent for where it's gone,
but that the scaling of the initiative was insufficient
to meet the outcomes and, um, intended by the strategy?
Correct. I've got,
I You can, yes.
I mean, I appreciate the answers given, given, uh, so,
so far and of course the strategy was implemented in 2017
to increase organ donation.
Um, and so what the de it decreased donors
and, uh, donations in 2017 was 73, um,
last year it was 70.
Um, so we in effect have spent millions of dollars
to achieve, uh, what,
Um, I think we've, I think we've achieved, um,
considerably in terms of our working with health, um,
to improve education and understanding.
I think the challenge is that the health system has been
through a lot of turmoil in that time through COVID,
and actually we are seeing changes worldwide that indicate
that, um, it's more challenging now
to recruit organ donors, um, and whanau than it once was.
What we have not been able to deliver
is increasing referral rates
and, um, increasing consent rates.
And there are really complex issues that are, um,
that wrap around those.
We believe that the, certainly if we look at evidence from
the investments made in the UK
and Australia, the investments made in donor
specific staff at the bedside,
which requires a very significant uplift in funding is
what converted their consent rates from 30 to 60
and what increased their referral rates from 30
to 40 to 90 plus.
And so that step we have not been able to make
with the funding that was appropriated in 20 budget 21.
So stop One more stop now I've got you.
So assume, assume you're talking to the link nurses,
which were first piloted in 2014.
Um, well, from, from a,
you can probably see from the committee's point of view,
we've seen a lot of government money spent without
actually achieving achieving anything.
And if anything, um, numbers have have been going down.
You talk about increasing complexity.
Can we actually have specific examples of what you mean
by things in more complex now?
So one of the key, um, areas
that is prominently in discussion in international, uh,
evidence around organ donation for instance, is the impact
that first COVID
and then subsequently seems to have continued around public
trust in healthcare and public systems.
And we know that that has had
or is believed to have been, um, a challenge
in many countries around the world in terms
of people being willing to donate both blood
and organs in their, in respect of their hanau.
Um, I think that the other challenge has been
that health systems around the world,
and not withstanding the fact
that Health New Zealand has invested more in ICUs,
but the demands and the frontline challenges
for intensive care teams remain very difficult.
And that organ donation, it isn't straightforward.
People think that, oh,
why are people just not asking everybody?
There's a lot of evidence, for instance,
particularly in the areas
where we could uplift organ donation, which is the donation
after cardiovascular death, that there's a long,
there should be a long period of run in, of building trust
with whanau, identifying early
that individuals are potential donors,
spending time building that trust,
and that that process may take anywhere up to five
or six days before formal discussion is had.
That's challenging for intensive care teams.
It involves people needing to be really confident about
what they're asking and what they're telling.
It involves them being able to spend time
with whanau over a long period of time.
All right. I think we've got that
and that's the challenge. I'm going to move on to
Jenny.
Thank you very much. Um, I'm just interested in, um,
you said you had a comm strategy, you'd put money into, um,
advertising and public awareness.
How much money have you put into your campaign,
whether it's social media, I think you mentioned, um,
and how effective has it been?
What are the results that you've had from
any advertising spend?
I think that, I don't,
I can't necessarily give you a clear picture of that
because we obviously as an organization have access to
communication spend globally.
Um, what I can say is that
alongside things like registration
and public awareness, that does not necessarily, um,
have a very well evidenced link directly to consent rates,
given the complexity of the picture.
So we, we spend as an organization,
a very significant amount of money on publicity
and public awareness every year.
What, what, what is that? Uh, it, what
Is a significant amount of money?
Um, I can't tell you off the top of my head.
I can send you, um, some information around that.
So you spend a significant amount of money,
but you, there's no direct link to any, um, outcomes for it.
Not in, not in organ donation.
In blood donation and, um, plasma donation.
Yes, there is in organ donation,
it's a much more complex issue.
Most people are aware
that they could be asked about organ donation in the rare
scenario that they find themselves in an intensive care.
Is there much evidence that that makes a lot of difference
to people's immediate responses?
No, there is not.
Okay. You would to come back to us on what kind
of spending you do, you're doing in terms of your comms.
Dr Two very quick supplementaries on my colleagues'
point in, and I'll ask another question, um,
to confirm your answer to Ms.
Crot. Was that the organizational comms team?
Health New Zealand comms team? No. Or blood?
Oh, uh, NZ boss's comms team.
Right, okay. Thank you.
Um, and that,
and that, um, spend in the budget,
21 money was a share
of $3.7 million a year at the maximum people.
Uh, I don't know how much, I can't tell you
how much was spent from each of the two
Budgets, but is it correct that a maximum
of $3.7 million a year was allocated?
And so that is a avail what is available
for additional work Yes.
In this comms plan? Well,
No, the 3.7 million is the total
of what's been available over that time. Yes.
That's, and the share of that is available for
Comms. And so that has been
a share of that. Yeah.
Thank you. And from
that 3.7 million 101,
um, uh, existing intensive care staff were also
trained, um, uh, for their awareness of organ donation. We,
We have trained, um, so we've increased the, the range
of training available
and we have a continual program of training
and interaction with intensive care
staff across the country.
And it will be a very significant number
of intensive care staff.
Well, I can tell you the committee's been advised
by Health New Zealand that 101 people were trained.
So that seems like a good outcome from, uh,
the money that you were, I think
It will be significantly higher than that.
That's the physician, that's just the doctors, some of the p
that's some of the physicians.
But we go out regularly to every intensive care unit
and provide training, um, and also to theater staff
and other people involved in organ donation.
It's a, it's a complex eco ecosystem that gets us from
potential donor to successful transplantation. I
Just have a quick question around, so you had the funds
appropriated for the purpose of extending services
that didn't necessarily go towards that was,
was there reporting back to Parliament or to the minister
or wherever the appropriate channel was to say that we've,
we've got a challenge here in reaching this strategy and,
and how often were those reports, um,
or progress updates made? Uh,
Absolutely. Can order Mr.
Chair, um, Order Dr. Vera.
Yeah. I mean, thank you.
I understand colleagues are collaborating to try
and get to the bottom of a confusing set of information
that we've been, uh, we've been given. And
This is no disrespect to Previous.
No, I understand. I I walked into this room determined to
find out the answer to this as well.
And I know that at some point
during early on in today's proceedings, um, it has been said
that the appropriated money wasn't used for that purpose.
But then I believe that in multiple times we've come back
to the fact that it expenditure under all of the headings
that the money was appropriate for appropriated
for has actually occurred.
So I, I note the, um,
assertion in your statement has been contradicted
by the story that's come out across the Yeah, yeah, across.
I I I did what? It was clear.
How does that, so that's, that's fine.
The question still stands, it's,
and it's more around sort of a, a governance piece
or a transparency and accountability piece was that, was,
um, what reporting was done back to Parliament
or to the minister or wherever
that appropriate channel was mm-hmm.
Um, around your challenges that you may have faced and,
and you've mentioned a number of times around,
around funding challenges to implement the strategy.
And the, the ministry has been, uh, kept informed
through our pathways
of quarterly reporting on our activities.
Um, they've also been very supportive
and we have conversations regularly about the challenges
of delivery in this space.
I, um, I feel
that they have been kept well informed throughout the
pathway and they take an interest in the work that we do.
I can confirm that the Crown Monitoring team
Is confident around where
The money has been spent in terms of the appropriation
for delivery of the strategically team.
Okay. That's good. Good. Yeah.
I've gonna go to Cam, we're we have time? Yeah.
I just have one final very quick question
for the committee going forward, who should we be talking
to when we want to talk about organ donation
or ask questions about this?
We've got three entities in front of us today.
The ministry is not here. When the committee
has a question, who do we ask?
Uhanswered Both please. And
You'll answer these questions.
We we'll, because previously we've had
asking the other agencies sort of a answer to them.
So just to be clear, we No, well, it's been true.
Um, this committee has asked questions
and not had a clear, uh, answer about who is is responsible.
So delivering the strategy, improving organ donation
and improving blood donation is all the
remit. Blood and Organ Museum.
We, well, we can, I can I just get it.
I think, um, I've seen
agencies actually working together to develop a plan.
So I think to create a step change in the rates of donation,
we need both agencies and,
and including the Ministry of Health, which I'm here
to represent today, um, working together
and agreeing a, a process
by which we can make those step changes.
Um, and so I'm confident that with NNC Boss
and HNZ, that we can actually do that.
Um, and we will be advising the minister in the New Years in
terms of mechanisms and approaches to do that.
So Hamish, yeah, sorry. So
Scratch, well, 80 years in into the strategy
and a lot, lot of you answer,
we are going to develop a plan.
Um, do you see how we're kind
of a little bit frustrated in the fact that
after eight years we still seem to be developing a plan
to implement a strategy from 2017?
My reflections would be that we've delivered, uh, a number
of the strategic priorities.
However, there are two remaining that we need
to get a rally on.
And I think the, we're House New Zealanders at the moment
and we're, um, NZ bosses, we're ready to kind
of move forward and be very clear
and deliberate about those actions
and who is accountable for them.
Can you put those actions in bullet point for us? Now?
I can't do that. I think this is something
that we would have to develop collectively
and get ownership across organizations to deliver those.
Okay. All right.
We're, we're over time,
but, um, thank you
for coming in here today and seeing the committee.
I think we've had good you a a couple of times now.
Um, we need this to work for Kiwis.
Kiwis need you to get this to where it needs to be.
So, um, I'd encourage you, you know, from all members
of money to please do what needs to be done to,
to deliver the strategy.
Thank you. We
Do best. Thank you.